---
comments: true
date: 2021-10-03 22:12:17
layout: post
slug: ROI
title: ROI in AI - Expectations vs Reality
tags:
- machine learning
- Learnings
- AI Trenches
---

A lot of companies and teams are betting big on DeepTech like AI to drive the next phase of growth. While AI can certainly be the “energy” to help you move to the next orbit, most teams falter big time. While there are many reasons for this, one key reason is the ill-founded expectations by senior people (VPs, CXOs, business leaders etc) in the company. Today’s post will explore this facet of AI - often the least spoken one. 

Most leaders/companies start AI in their teams/product lines much later. Traditional corporate wisdom has always advocated “quick” wins because that is how one establishes themselves and gets the key stakeholders super excited. So they advocate the same in AI!

This is also driven by: 
1) Articles on AI in popular media with lofty claims (remember the humanoid dancing in Tesla AI day or Sophia - not many people understand these are mere marketing and perception gimmicks)
2) The thought that AI at the end of the day is a code - so it cannot be very different from software engineering. The issues are mere initial hiccups which is always the case with any new tech, so is the case with AI

So most leaders expect the ROI curve in AI to be a vertical takeoff. This expectation is further fueled by the fact that AI doesn't come cheap - data, data engg & AI teams, talent cost, hardware cost, data collection & labeling cost and time etc, MLOps etc [Read my previous write up on the economics of AI - https://lnkd.in/eCqRgq7v ]

This is where most Orgs/Teams make THE mistake. The true ROI curve in AI is very very different from their expectations. As shown in the figure below, it follows a S shape curve. 

1) Initial lower part of S: One needs to invest a lot of time and energy with very little ROI - finding the right use case (https://lnkd.in/e6-ikYb9), right quality and quantity of data and labels (more on this in another post), right modeling approach, right metrics etc. This can take anywhere between 1-3 years. 

2) Middle part of S: This is where one gets the highest ROI per unit effort. This is because most of the hard work has been done in the first 1-3 years. All key stakeholders have a better understanding of the AI journey. This phase is all  about building the 2nd/3rd version of AI systems 

3) Later upper part of S: This is where the ROI again starts to stagnate. This phase is where your team is building the 6th/7th version of the system and trying to push systems performance to the upper 90s. This often requires completely new approaches, new algorithms. Its not just adding a couple of lines of code!  

Another thing most folks don't necessarily understand is that each of the 3 different phases of the curve requires a very different strategy - type of goals, kind of skillsets, focus areas, etc